Graphics Structure Editor. Copyright (C) 1989 Level 9 Computing Ltd 
-------------------------------------------------------------------

This editor is not for drawing pictures, but to let you take 
Neochrome format graphics (eg from Art Studio) and combine them 
into space-efficient 3D rooms, animation sequences etc. 

It handles four types of objects (graphics data)... 

* Cell: a 16x16 pixel square, in 16 colours (with colour 0 meaning  
  transparent). This is the way in which real pixels are stored: 
  the other objects are basically collections of cells. 

* Raster: a rectangle of cells, any number of cells wide by any 
  number high. Any cell can be used anywhere within a raster, and 
  the same cell can be used many times (to save space). 

* XZH object. These are built from any number of any of the four 
  types of objects, each at its own 3D position. Objects within an 
  XZH object are also known as "items". 

  The co-ordinate system is: 

         ^  H        (H is the height above the "floor") 
         | 
         | 
         +----->  X  (X is the left/right position) 
          \ 
           \ 
            Z        (bigger Z means it's nearer to the viewer)

  XZH objects can be used for a picture on a wall (i.e slightly 
  in front of it), an animated bird in a gilded cage (i.e slightly 
  behind the bars), or a 3D room made up from dozens of objects. 

* Animation sequence. This is a list of animation instructions: 
  object (display any of the four types of objects), shift (move), 
  repeat next instruction, and fork (start another animation 
  sequence, to run simulteneously). These instructions are processed 
  one-at-a-time in order.  

                             EDITING 
                             ------- 

The screen normally displays two windows, one at the top and one at 
the bottom, and each shows one object. 

To the right of each window is a column of status information 
for the corresponding object. For example: 

20        Current object number. 
4110      Current item (only used when editing an XZH object). 
0  0  64  3D position (X Z H) of current item (ditto). 
xzh       Type of object. 
x 144     X position of cursor object. 
z 16      Z position of cursor object. 
h 64      H position of cursor object. 
4x0x0     X, H, "unused" sizes of current object, if raster. 
Scr0,0    How far window is scrolled (X,Y). Use for big XZH objects.  
OqfHR     Status display (capital=on, lower case=off): 
            O=raster Offset (only affects preview mode),  
            Q=Quick mode (use when editing very big XZH objects), 
            F=Fast mode (do not use), 
            H=auto Height mode (for placing rasters on XZH floor), 
            R=Reflect. 

The cursor is a twinkling dot, which you can move anywhere with the 
mouse. Normally, when it is in one window (half of the screen), a 
copy of the object from the other window follows it about and can 
be placed at its current position by pressing the left mouse button 
or space - this is the usual way of building objects. 

Only XZH objects have truly 3D cursor movement. For these, the mouse 
controls movement along the ground (changing X and Z). And, provided 
you're not in auto height mode (toggled on/off by "H"), you press 
keyboard "-" and "+" (with or without shift), or move the mouse with 
its right button pressed, to change the height H above the ground. 


                  DISPLAYING ANOTHER OBJECT 
                  ------------------------- 

To change which object is displayed in the current window.. 

7/9 Numeric keypad 7 or 9 display the previous or next object. This 
    is not intended for moving from object 1 to 500, but is ideal if 
    e.g animation frames of a person running are stored in adjacent 
    objects, because you can step through them quickly for a check. 

.   Dot makes the editor ask you for a new object number. Type a 
    number, press return and the chosen object is displayed. 

1/3 Numeric keypad 1 or 3 display the previous or next object in the 
    other window. (The other window doesn't visibly alter, because 
    it is not being redisplayed, but the object number and therefore 
    the object following the cursor are changed). This is useful if, 
    e.g, you are copying adjacent cells into a raster. 


                              EDITING 
                              ------- 

* CELL EDITING. Cells cannot be edited or copied, except by saving 
them in a Neochrome file (S) and importing (I) them later. Normally 
pressing the left mouse button means "copy the object in the other 
window to here". But because you can't copy onto a cell, moving the 
cursor onto a cell and pressing the left button has been reused as 
a quick way to select that cell as the current one. 


* RASTER EDITING. To create a raster, choose an object number in the 
range allowed for rasters (press "Help", "N" and "N" for information) 
and display it, e.g by pressing keypad "." and entering the number. 

Initialise the raster using the "R" (raster) command, e.g: 
  R4 (return)   set the width to 4 cells 
  3 (return)    set the height to 3 cells 
  (return)      initially use some blank cells. 
This raster is now 12 cells big; you can see the numbers of the 
(blank) cells it contains by moving the mouse dot over the raster 
space, near the top left of the window. 

To copy cells into the raster, display the raster in the upper window 
and choose a cell object in the lower window. Move the cursor onto the 
raster (followed by the image of the chosen cell) and press space or 
the left mouse button to place it. Repeat until the raster is full. 

To copy a raster into a raster, display the destination in the upper 
window and the source in the lower. Move the cursor across the upper 
raster (followed by the image of the source raster) and press space 
or the left mouse button to place it. All cells which overlap the 
target raster are copied. 

(Note however that no cells or pixels are really changed or copied 
by any of the above, as rasters really just contain cell numbers. 
Much the same applies to XZH and animation objects too.) 

Arrow keys change the size of an existing raster: press up/down to 
increase/decrease height, or left/right to increase/decrease width. 


* XZH EDITING. You do not create XZH objects as such (only Rasters 
need initialising); just pick a number in the range allowed. 

Any kind of object can be copied into an XZH object. It is better 
to have the destination in the upper window, so display the XZH 
object there, and the source object in the lower window. 

Now move the cursor around the destination XZH, and it is followed 
by the object you are copying. Note that this copy does not follow 
smoothly, but moves in jumps - this is because it can usually only 
be positioned on a cell boundary (every 16th pixel). 

The mouse controls movement along the ground, changing X and Z. If 
auto height mode is set (toggle it on/off by pressing "H"), the copy 
automatically sits with its lowest pixels at height H=0. If not in 
this mode, you can change the height H by keyboard "-" and "+" (with 
or without shift), or moving the mouse with its right button pressed. 

Press the left mouse button, or space to copy the object into the 
XZH object. Space is better, as it is easier to get a single press.

Accurate positioning. Normally, objects can only be positioned on a 
16x16x16 boundaries within XZH objects. Press keypad "*" to toggle 
"four pixel mode", in which you can position them accurate to 4x4x4, 
though positions are still rounded to 16 pixels on display. This 
allows several layers of objects to be placed at what the game will 
think is the same Z coordinate (when rounded to 16x16x16), allowing 
for things such as a picture on a wall or an expression on a face. 

Preview mode. Enter preview mode by pressing "P" and leave by "Esc". 
This mode shows the current window as it will appear in a finished 
game, and therefore an XZH object is shown in 3D. It allows you to 
check, for example, that a midground object really is between fore- 
and background objects as you copy it into place. Preview mode also 
shows animation objects (if rapid animation makes editing difficult, 
press "S" in preview mode for single step mode.. thereafter, press 
any key to step on the animation). See later for more information. 
Note: space is NOT the same as left mouse button in preview mode. 

To edit an existing XZH object, e.g to delete one of the objects 
it contains (items), press: 
   Esc    to go to the start of the current XZH object, 
   Tab    to step on to the next item (the current item flashes), 
   D      to delete the current item, 
   Delete to delete the XZH object and all its contents. 
You will notice that items are stored in order of their Z positions: 
background objects first and working towards the foreground. 


* ANIMATION SEQUENCE EDITING. Animation sequences are just lists of 
instructions; use preview mode (see just above) to reveal what the 
animation looks like. 

To enter new instructions, press: 
   F  Fork  (start another animation sequence AND continue) 
   O  display Object 
   R  Repeat next instruction: 0,1=forever, 2-16=2-16 times, 17+=pick 
      a random number 16-31 and do-the-next-instruction-and-repeat 
      unless it exceeds yours. "Repeat m, repeat n, object o" means 
      "Repeat m+n, object o"; this allows for bigger repeat numbers. 
   S  Shift (move) 
To change a number in an instruction: move the cursor onto it; the 
old number is highlit; type the new number and press return. 

To delete an instruction: move the cursor on to its name, and when 
this is highlit, press "D". To delete the sequence, press Delete. 

To copy an animation sequence into another, display the source one in 
the lower window, move the cursor on to the destination sequence in 
the upper window and press the left mouse button, or space. Normally 
the animation instructions are copied before those in the destination 
sequence; to copy them after an instruction in the middle, first move 
the cursor on to its name so that this is highlit. 

The other types of objects can be copied into an animation sequence 
in the same way, resulting in an appended or inserted Object command. 

Example animation sequences for a man walking from left to right.. 

2500: 
   Repeat !                 ! is displayed for 0: repeat forever. 
   Object # 2501            Display object 2501 (two strides).
   End. 

2501:
   Object #100              Display object 100 (start of movement). 
   Shift  x 4   z 0   h -1  Shift 4 pixels to the right and 1 down. 
   Object #101 
   Shift  x 4   z 0   h -1 
   Object #102              Varying the height H for the "bobbing" 
   Shift  x 4   z 0   h 1   action as the man walks along means 
   Object #103              that, in the objects for the individual 
   Shift  x 4   z 0   h 1   frames, we can keep his head and torso 
   Object #104              in a constant position. This will make 
   Shift  x 4   z 0   h -1  it easier for the game to super-impose
   Object #105              facial expressions and possessions as
   Shift  x 4   z 0   h -1  play continues. 
   Object #106  
   Shift  x 4   z 0   h 1 
   Object #107              Display object 107 (end of movement). 
   Shift  x 4   z 0   h 1   Shift 4 pixels to the right and 1 up. 
   End. 


             IMPORT AND EXPORT OF NEOCHROME PICTURES 
             --------------------------------------- 

Graphics for the Structure Editor are drawn using an arts package, 
such as Neochrome or Art Studio, and must be imported. 

* IMPORTING. To import a Neochrome picture file, move the cursor to 
the upper window and press "I". Then type the picture filename, e.g: 
MYPIC.NEO and press return. The picture is loaded into a temporary 
area of memory known as "the Neochrome screen" and is displayed. (You 
can see the Neochrome screen at other times by displaying object 0).  


* GRABBING A RASTER. After importing, move to the lower window and 
choose a raster (presumably an unused one, which means you must 
dimension it with "R") which is the right size for one of the things 
drawn on the Neochrome screen. 

Now move the cursor to the upper window, where you will see two 
parallel lines, indicating the size of the raster. Position this 
"box" around the thing you want to grab, e.g the picture of a table. 
Then press the mouse button to grab the graphics in the "box" and 
swap them with the contents of the raster. 

(Unlike normal "copy" operations, which leave cells and pixels 
unchanged, grabbing data from the Neochrome screen in this way 
actually changes the pixels in all of the cells used by the raster.) 


* AUTO-IMPORTING is a faster method when you want to grab all the 
graphics from the Neochrome screen which you have just imported. 

Press "A" and the system asks for the number of the starting cell. 
It will copy all the non-blank 16x16 pixels on the Neochrome screen 
into cells, starting with your number and working upwards, so enter 
a number which is clear of any already-used cells. (Because blank, 
i.e all colour 0, parts of the picture are ignored, you should space 
out things in a format easy to draw and not cram them together.)

The request "Blank cells only?" is now redundant, no blank cells are
imported. You will presumably then go and copy the cells into rasters
 yourself. 


                        MISCELLANEOUS FEATURES
                        ---------------------- 

* SCROLLING THE WINDOW. Because lots of objects are too big to fit 
into their window, the numeric keypad can be used to scroll them 
around so that you can edit different parts: 

      8       Use the keypad to scroll the window across the object. 
      |       Press 8 to move the window up, 2 down, 4 left, 6 right. 
   4--+--6    And 5 to centre it again. Because the window starts at 
      |       the top left of the object, scrolling down and right 
      2       are speeded up: 2 and 6 scroll in four-cell jumps. 


* SAVE. Press "S" to save a Neochrome image of the entire screen on 
disk. You are asked for a file name. 


* PREVIEW MODE shows you the object in the current window as it will 
appear in the game: an XZH object is shown in 3D, and an animation 
sequence is animated. The other window is not shown, but the object 
from it slowly follows the cursor as a sprite. 

With an XZH object, you can move the cursor (and cursor object) 
about through the 3D scene. If you press "P" again in preview mode, 
the cursor object is positioned on the nearest 16x16 boundary to 
the cursor. If you waggle the cursor dot, away from the cursor, the 
cursor object slides towards it one pixel at a time. To change the 
height H, press the mouse button and move the mouse as usual. 

To copy the cursor object into an XZH object, just press the left 
mouse button as normal. Because you can see the real appearance of 
objects, this may be the best way of editing 3D scenes. 

When an animation sequence is displayed in preview mode, the left 
mouse button's function changes. Press it to restart the animation.

You can slow or speed animation by pressing keyboard "-" or "+". 
Press "S" in preview mode for single step mode.. thereafter, press 
any key to step on the animation. See below for more information. 
Note: space is NOT the same as left mouse button in preview mode. 

Screens in preview mode can be saved to a neochrome file by pressing
W (Write).  The system requests a file name and saves the current
frame being previewed.  This utility is useful for demos.

Finally, press "Esc" to leave preview mode. 


* HELP. Press "Help" for details of common commands. The help screen 
ends with, "Leave Editor?": press "Y" (yes) to quit (you are warned 
and can change your mind if if this could lose data), or "N" (no) 
to display the next help screen, showing object information. This 
tells you the ranges of numbers allowed for the various types of 
objects, and ends by asking if you want the 'special functions' 
menu: press "Y" to see this menu, or "N" to return to editing. 


* PANIC PIXEL. Move the cursor to the extreme top right of the screen 
and press the left mouse button to hit the panic button. This is an 
extreme form of "Esc"; it should stop everything and restart the 
editor with object 0 in both windows.  The panic pixel also works 
as an  UNDO of the last change made.


* REFLECTION. Press "Return" to toggle reflection on/off. When an 
object is copied into a graphical object (a cell into a raster, 
or anything cell/raster/XZH into an XZH), the current reflection 
status is stored along with it. Thus, to set up an XZH object for 
something symmetrical, you would set reflection off, copy in one 
half, set reflection on and copy in the same half, now reflected). 


* RASTER OFFSET. This is a constant, added to the object numbers of 
all rasters displayed in preview mode, or by the game. It is set by 
pressing "O", for Offset, (but note: "O" means something different 
while editing an animation sequence, and in preview mode itself (!)). 
This allows several groups of graphics to be displayed using the 
same animation sequences and/or game logic - e.g a dozen game people 
who all have the same range of actions.  


* SPECIAL FUNCTIONS are on a menu accessed via "Help" - see above. 
As the menu warns, the potential for disaster is quite great, so 
make a backup copy of your disk first. 

1..add new objects. Add some unused/blank objects and shuffle all 
the higher objects up. It asks you where to add the new objects, 
which are all the same type as the one before; the idea is to make 
room for you to e.g set up more rasters. The range of numbers used 
for object types change, but that for cells is NOT changed by this 
command. So the starting position for cells MUST be changed first, 
by "6", if there is any danger of existing objects overlapping them. 
Addition takes several minutes; use "Help" to see what the ranges 
of object types are afterwards. 

2..remove objects. Deletes some objects (blank and otherwise) and 
shuffles all the higher objects down. It asks you which objects to 
delete; please make sure they are all of the same type. The range 
used for cells remains the same, but the range of numbers for other 
object types are changed. Remove takes several minutes; "Help" 
shows the ranges of object types afterwards.  

3..find and delete unused objects (not just cells). It asks you 
which objects to check; please make sure they are all of the same 
type. Object type ranges, and numbers of remaining objects are 
unchanged. It takes several minutes. 

4..scrunch objects together. This renumbers objects, and changes 
object ranges - sliding them all down to fill in any gaps and make 
the numbers as small as possible. Numbers of objects, and object 
type ranges, are all changed (even cells). It takes a long time. 

5..make maps. No longer used. Generates a set of rasters as a basis 
for the floor plan map used for collision detection in the game (i.e 
showing where people can walk). The rasters can then be modified in 
map mode (press "t" while over a suitable raster) and the keypad used 
to change entries to add floorpointers and add/delete free squares. 

6..move cells. Change the starting number of the cells and 
renumber all references to them. It takes several minutes. Use 
this to make room for other objects, or to avoid clashes when e.g 
preparing to import structures which use overlapping numbers.

7..set number of cells. Sets the finishing number of the cells, so 
determining how much memory is saved/loaded by the editor. Do not 
set this too high, as even "empty" cells take 128 bytes each. 

8..print structures. Print objects in a text form to RS232, 
Centronics, a file, or to the screen. It is useful for, e.g debugging 
if funny things happen with an XZH object (perhaps it gets very slow 
to edit), and to keep a paper record. 

9..set auto cell range. When "R" is pressed to dimension a raster, 
if you just press return the program automatically chooses blank 
cells for the raster. This function sets the upper and lower limits 
of the range of cells chosen from, though the highest cell of the 
range may be overshot. 

0..change misc settings. Display a further menu to: 
   1..toggle safe mode. When safe mode is set, the editor protects 
      itself slightly more against corrupted structure files, but 
      runs slower. (Safe mode is also set by pressing "S" after the 
      editor loads). Leave it off unless you have problems. 
   2..enable Neochrome screen. This does NOT refer to the memory 
      used when grabbing cells, but to some cosmetic graphics which 
      show the border between screens, panic "button" etc. These 
      graphics are only loaded when the program is, so after using 
      this option, you need to save the data (with "Undo"), quit 
      from the editor (from "Help") and run the program again. 
   3..disable Neochrome screen. See just above. 
   4..toggle information. Switch the information at the right of 
      the screen on/off (the object number, status display etc). 
      You will almost always want the information shown, but it can 
      be a pain when editing wide objects, and switching it off 
      slightly speeds the editor. 
   Esc..return to editor screen (as usual). 

-..set x size for implied raster. When the object displayed in a 
   window is a cell, it is not displayed alone, but in a rectangle 
   of perhaps eighty adjacent cells. The width of the rectangle is 
   initially 13 cells, but you can change it with the "-" function. 
   For example, if you have imported cells which matched up 
   vertically on a Neochrome screen, setting the width to 20 will 
   mean that they match up in the window displaying cells, as well. 

q..export objects. Write out a range of objects to a file. Only 
   select one type of object: if you want to export several types, 
   export each to a seperate file. Export/Import can be used to copy 
   objects from one structure file to another, but you may need to 
   do some renumbering (e.g by 1..add new objects) before exporting, 
   or perhaps before importing, to avoid overwriting necessary 
   objects in the destination file. Take care and full backups. 

w..import objects. Read a file previously created by export. It asks 
   what range of objects you want to overwrite with the objects from 
   the disk file. Enter two numbers, which must be the same as those 
   used for the export. Bear in mind that references within the 
   imported objects may not work, because the objects they use have 
   been deleted or replaced by objects with different functions. 

e..truncate structures. Delete all objects above a specified number. 
   This is a debugging command, for amputating the end of the object 
   data if it has become corrupted. 

r..delete objects. Like "2..remove objects", but does not shuffle 
   later objects down and so does no renumber. It is a bit faster 
   than removing, but not much. 

t..read text-form structures from disk. The format is the same as 
   for "8..print structures", and it can read files produced by this. 



€                         WHAT ALL THE KEYS DO 
                         -------------------- 
KEYBOARD...  

A = Auto-import graphics after "I"
B 
C 
D = Delete current raster or animation item 
E
F = toggle Fast mode (refreshes less screen) 
G 
H = toggle auto Height mode 
I = Import neochrome screen 
J 
K 
L 
M = toggle Magnify window (disabled) 
N 
O = display Object in animation sequence 
P = select Preview mode (Esc leaves it) 
Q = toggle Quick mode (experts only) 
R = dimension Raster / Repeat animation 
S = save screen in Neochrome file / Shift animation 
T = toggle map mode (not worth using) 
W = save a previewed screen to a neochrome file

U, V, X, Y, Z = nothing 

- = slow animation in preview mode / decrease H in XZH 
+ = speed animation in preview mode / increase H in XZH 

Up arrow    = Increase height of raster 
Down arrow  = Decrease height of raster 
Left arrow  = Increase width of raster 
Right arrow = Decrease width of raster  

0 = toggle single window mode 
Esc = to start of current XZH / cancel input, preview etc. 
Tab = step on to next item of current XZH  
Delete = Delete items in current raster or animation 

Space  = place object (acts as left mouse button) 
Return = toggle reflection 
Help   = help and status information 
Undo   = save all the structure data

left mouse  = place object 
right mouse = press and move mouse to adjust H in XZH object 


NUMERIC KEYPAD...

* toggle 4-pixel mode. 
- decrease Z size for raster objects (not worth using) 
+ increase Z size for raster objects (not worth using) 

7 current object -1.   8 scroll window up.    9 current object +1 
4 scroll window left.  5 centralise scroll.   6 scroll window right 
1 other object -1.     2 scroll window down.  3 other object +1

. (dot) ask for object number and change to displaying that object 


€                             HINTS & TIPS
                             ------------ 

Save your work, using "Undo", about every 5 minutes of active work. 
Backup your disk several times a day. And don't say I didn't warn you. 

If funny things happen, first check the options on the status line. 

You are advised not to try and recover from errors in the structure 
file. Go back to an earlier version. 

Efficient animation. Graphics that move, e.g anything displayed by 
an animation sequence, are called "sprites" and take much more 
processing power to display than static objects. Please bear this 
in mind when designing objects which sometimes move, or where only 
part moves. For example: 
* A wall lamp with a flickering flame is more efficient if set up 
  as an XZH object, which contains an animation structure for just 
  the flame. Likewise a clock with a pendulum, a spectator who 
  constantly waves a flag, etc. 
* A man who occasionally cheers is more efficiently shown with his 
  resting expression on his face - this can be overlayed when he 
  cheers. Linewise a candle which flickers only very occasionally. 

Efficient objects. XZH objects use 5 bytes per item, while Rasters 
use 2 bytes per cell. Both have a 2 byte overhead. Thus it is 
clearly more efficient to use a Raster if possible. However, a 
full-screen raster would still take 484 bytes, and it would almost 
certainly be better to use an XZH object made up from several 
standard rasters for large areas, such as the back wall. Don't 
forget reflection either (all objects can be reflected, even cells).  

Object 0 is special. If you display object 0 in the editor, e.g via 
the dot command, this is taken to mean the Neochrome screen used for 
importing sprites. In structures, however, object 0 has another 
meaning and it displays nothing: the effect is as though a blank cell 
had been displayed, but NO processing power is wasted. 

Always dimension a Raster (using "R") to a group of non-blank cells; 
either with cells off the end of the file (greater than MaxCell), or 
as a specific group of cells containing something recognisable for 
this purpose. If you let the "R" (Raster) command pick a lot of blank 
cells for you, you can be sure that sometime later you will forget 
which cells it chose, use the once-blank cells for storing graphics 
and not notice until bugs are reported in the pictures. 

The 3D system assumes that each thing displayed is at one distance 
from the observer, and this works pretty well for flat, rectangular 
or small objects, where you are always looking at the front face. 
But it does not work at all for big irregular objects, or objects 
at an angle such as the diagonal side walls of a stage set, where 
the surface that you can see is at a wide range of distances. E.g 
a diagonal wall should be set up as an XZH object, like a Venetian 
blind with vertical slats, each one cell wide: 
   --       A diagonal wall appears on the screen as a continuous
     --     diagonal surface, but its internal structure is an XZH 
       --   object, built up from vertical 1-cell-thick slats. 

To create an empty structure file, use special functions to truncate 
it at object 1; set 0 cells; and then add new objects. (This has not 
been tested).  

When editing animation sequences, remember that some of the useful 
keys, e.g "O", change their meanings. 

For animations, assume the game will run at about 8 frames per sec. 


                               FEATURES 
                               -------- 

3D graphics (in preview mode and the game), need a background in 
order to be shown properly. Without one, they are displayed all 
right but the 3D impression is not perfect. In a game, make sure 
that moving objects always have something to move in front of. 

You should theoretically be able to edit anything in either window, 
but it is a great deal safer to only edit the object in the top one. 


                                 BUGS 
                                 ---- 

Special function 4, "scrunch", does not work. 

Special function t, "read text structures", is not yet quite 
compatible with files produced by s.f 8, "print structures". 

Object numbers can not be greater than 8000. 

Rasters are not displayed correctly when scrolling is set, but you 
can edit them, and the numbers on the right are correct, except for 
item (cell) numbers. 

Animation objects cannot yet be reflected. 

A raster's size can sometimes get corrupted while working on it. (The 
size is shown as, e.g 4x3x0 on the right). If the first two numbers 
change to silly values, it may be best to delete the raster (use the 
"Delete" key) and start again. 

Auto import ignores "Y" after "Blank cells only?", treating it as "N". 
